My project was to reproduce the results of the Richards et al (2001) paper on the "Colors of Quasars".  Measuring the redshift of astronomical objects is a daunting task as spectroscopy needs hours of telescope time in constrast to photometry. Assuming a template spectrum for quasars, their colors will depend on the redshift of the quasars. Attempts at estimating redshift of extra-galactic objects using their colors is not a new idea (reference). The advantage that the SDSS brings to the table is it's filter design. The u, g, r, i & z bands are designed such that there is minimal to no overlap between two adjacent filters - unlike the Johnson filters U,B,V,R,I which have been the standard in astronomy for decades. This minimal overlap leads to better individual band photometry and therefore better estimates of the color. Using this technique, Richards et al (2001) show that their redshift estimates are %% correct.

Two weeks into the project, it was getting harder and harder to piece together the original data set. So, i resorted to creating a new data set of quasars and their colors from SDSS DR9. While the original paper worked with 2625 quasars from the SDSS DR3, SDSS DR9 has 145665 quasars. Using the SDSS u, g, r, i & z band apparent magnitudes, I plotted the color vs redshift relationship for quasars that lead to the clustered plot shown.


The concept of using accurate photometry to estimate the redshift of objects is not a new one. It was first proposed by Baum 1962 although the efficiency of the methods developed/various implementations over the years using conventional UBVRI photometry is low. THE SDSS survey is unique in this aspect because of the filters it uses in photometry, ugriz. These are different from the commonly used Johnson filters as the overlap between adjacent filters is negligible which gives the SDSS team an enormous edge over conventional photometry and in implementing the photometric redshift estimation methods accurately.

==============================

The practice of photometric redshift estimation through multi-band photometry was initially put forth by Baum 1962 but has only become popular and powerful at the turn of the century. The efficiency of these methods depends greatly on the amount of overlap between adjacent filters which is why the SDSS u, g, r, i, z and 2MASS J, H, K bands have an advantage over the conventional UBVRI photometric system.

Colors of Quasars by Richards et al. 2001 is a study of the color-color and color-redshift relationships of 2625 quasars, mostly from the SDSS DR3 catalogue and my work was to reproduce these results. As only part of the original data set was available on the internet, instead of reproducing the results, i worked on extending them using quasars from the SDSS DR9. Using sql query, i retrieved photometric data on 146,659 quasars and constructed the color-color and color-redshift relations. Variation in the color can be explained using the various emission and absorption lines that are characteristic of quasars. Refer to sec. 4.3 of Richards et al. 2001 for a detailed explanation. Looking at one of the interesting features, it can be seen that there's a large scatter in u-g color at high redshifts. As mentioned in sec 4.3, the rapid rise is due to the Lyman alpha forest and lyman-limit systems entering the u band causing there to be little to no flux! 

One can refer further to Vanden Berk et al. 2001 on a composite quasar spectrum from the SDSS and Fan 1999 on the simulation of stellar objects in SDSS color space.